=== AFFECTS ===

=== FOUND ===

=== CLEAR ===

=== BEGIN ===

=== RULES ===

=== DURABILITY ===

=== COMMANDS ===

=== REPLYLOCK ===

=== SOUL POINTS ===

=== DUAL-DAMAGE ===

=== NEXUS ===

=== PENALTIES ===

=== MANA ===

=== DEMON ===

=== COLOUR ===

=== CHAT ===

=== INFO ===

=== APPEARANCE ===

=== COMBO ===

=== INDUCT ===

=== AUTO-ADVANCE ===

=== SHEATHE ===

=== FORM ===

=== HEAVY ARMOUR ===

=== VAMPIRE ===

=== MAGE ===

=== MSDP ===

=== ' ===

=== MAIL SYNTAX ===

=== SCREEN READER ===

=== CLASSES ===

=== WOUNDS ===

=== CRAFTING ===

=== DROP ===

=== IMMUNITY ===

=== PRIMAL ===

=== TITLECOLOURS ===

=== MAGIC ===

=== WAR ===

=== KILL ===

=== LOCKPICKING ===

=== STATS ===

=== SCORE ===

=== BURST ===

=== EMOTE ===

=== REPLY ===

=== LOOK ===

=== MOUNT ===

=== INVENTORY ===

=== ZONE ===

=== WEREWOLF ===

=== AREA ===

=== AFK ===

=== HEALTH ===

=== ECONOMY ===
  - mercenary <opponent>

These are Economy war commands (see 'help war'), usable only while you are on 
your home plane, and the first three each cost one action to perform.

The mercenary command requires 5 Offence, and at least 2 must be Economy.  If 
your attack is 3 or more higher than your opponent's Defence, you will inflict
3 damage.  If you draw or win by 1 or 2, you inflict 2 damage.  If you lose by 
1 or 2, you inflict 1 damage.  You inflict no damage if you lose by 3 or more.
Note that you will automatically take 1 damage, regardless of how successful 
your attack is.  Mercenaries will never completely destroy a city.

=== GIVE ===
  - give <object>
  - give <object> <creature>
  - give <object> to <creature>
  - give <creature> [the] <object>
  - give to <creature> [the] <object>

  - accept <object>
  - accept <object> <creature>
  - accept <object> from <creature>
  - accept <creature> <object>
  - accept from <creature> [the] <object>

This command allows you to offer to give something you are carrying to another 
creature.  You must either specify the creature you wish to give it to, or 
target them first, and they must be standing within reach.  They then have 30 
seconds to accept, if they wish to take it from you.

You should use the optional word 'the' (listed in the syntax above) if you wish
to use multiple keywords for the first token.  For example if you want to give 
your gold collar to a black wolf you can type 'give wolf gold collar' or 'give 
collar black wolf', but not 'give black wolf gold collar' - instead you should 
type 'give black wolf the gold collar' (or 'give gold collar to black wolf').

Note that '@' is an alias for 'to' (and 'from' when accepting an object).

See also: wear wield remove get drop swap buy sell

=== PROMPT ===
  - prompt <text>
  - cprompt <text>
  - display

These commands allow you to customise your prompts.  Type 'display' to view a 
list of the variables that can be used within your prompts.

For example, you could type 'prompt $h/$H ($a)> ' to show your current Health, 
maximum Health, and action points (this is also the default prompt).

The 'prompt' command sets your normal prompt, while 'cprompt' sets your combat 
prompt.  If you have a combat prompt defined, you will see it instead of your 
regular prompt while you have an adrenaline rush.  If you only want to see the 
one prompt, type 'cprompt clear' and stick to the regular 'prompt' command.

Typing 'config prompt' will hide your prompt/s.

See also: display colour

=== COMBAT ===
NOTE: If you find this help file too confusing, type 'help tutorial'.

Type 'l?' to view the combat table for your left hand.  At the top you'll see a
list of valid commands, each of which are one letter, followed by their AP cost
in brackets.  To perform one of these commands, type 'l' followed by the 
letter - for example, if one of the commands is 'd' (for defence), you can type
'ld' to perform a left-handed defence.

Below the commands you'll see a list of all of the techniques available to you.
To perform these techniques, you need to type the commands for that location in
the appropriate order - for example, if one of the techniques for your left
hand is 'fss', you should type 'lf', 'ls' and 'ls' as three separate commands.
This may well trigger other techniques on the way - for example if 'fs' is also
a listed technique, then you will perform that technique on your second command
and the 'fss' technique on your third, allowing powerful combination attacks.

Type 'r?', 'f?' and 'h?' to view the combat tables for your right hand, feet
and head respectively.  These work in exactly the same way as your left hand,
although each of your four locations will have its own combat table.

See also: actions assist attack defence kill techniques interleaving

=== WIELD ===
  - wield <thing>

This command allows you to wield the specified thing in your hand, using it as 
a weapon, even if it is not intended to be used as such.  You must be carrying 
the thing in order to do this.

You cannot wield while you have an adrenaline rush.  The only exception is if
the item was disarmed, or lost due to having a body part chopped off - if this 
happens, you have 30 seconds during which you may rewield.  Doing so will cost 
1000 action points, -100 for every second you wait, to a minimum of 100 action 
points after 9 seconds.  Throwing a weapon doesn't count as a disarm, but if 
one of your hands is severed it can be rewielded as if it had been disarmed.

To use a weapon two-handed you must first wield it in one hand, then assist 
with the other (see 'help assist').

See also: wear remove get give drop swap actions

=== OPEN ===
  - open eyes/<object>
  - close eyes/<object>

These commands allow you to open and close your eyes, or a specified object 
that you are wearing.  You can see if an object can be opened and closed by 
looking at it (there will be a 'Special' field in the top section).

While your eyes are closed, you cannot see your opponent, and will suffer the 
usual -50% Defence penalty for visibility (see 'help blind fighting').  Certain
powers, such as Ears of the Bat, may give you additional benefits while your 
eyes are closed.  You will also be immune to attacks which require eye contact,
and have half your normal natural armour on your eyes (instead of none).

If you are wearing a helmet with a lowered visor, you suffer a -25% penalty to 
your Defence, applied after pain modifiers.  If you have Blind Fighting, this 
penalty is reduced to -10% (representing reduced hearing).  However the lowered
visor will protect the eyes, and also doubles the helmet's face protection.

See also: wear remove

=== REPAIR ===
  - repair
  - repair <creature>

This command allows you to fully repair all of your equipment, or that of the 
specified creature (including pets and other players).  It will remove heat 
and corrosion (rust/tarnish/etc) damage as well as normal physical damage.

Note that you only have access to this command while on your home plane.

See also: home

=== MTARGET ===
  - mtarget <thing>
  - mtarget <x coordinate> <y coordinate>

While mounted, this command replaces the target command for movement 
purposes.  The regular target command is still used for other activities 
such as combat.

See also: target

=== ARMOUR2 ===
To read the first part of this help file, type 'help armour'.

If your total bypass is 3% or more of your opponent's total armour, then at 
least 1% of your total damage is guaranteed to get through their combined 
armour layers.  This increases to 2% if your bypass is 6% of their armour, 3% 
at 9%, 4% at 12%, 5% at 15%, and so on, up to a maximum of 33% damage at 99%.

If your opponent's total armour is 3% or more of your total bypass, then at
least 1% of your total damage will be soaked by their combined armour layers.  
This increases to 2% damage if their armour is 6% of your bypass, 3% at 9%, 4% 
at 12%, 5% at 15%, and so on, up to a maximum of 33% damage at 99%.

Last but not least comes your immunity, which is treated the same as natural 
armour except that it is capped at 95%, and cannot be bypassed.

After applying all soak percentages, your total auto-absorb is subtracted from
the remaining damage.  This auto-absorb will typically be the same as the
total of all encumbrance worn on the struck location, although it may well be
adjusted by talents, powers and magical item bonuses.  If struck by a critical
hit, your opponent's total bypass will be subtracted from your auto-absorb.

=== RELIGION ===
  - jihad <opponent>

These are Religion war commands (see 'help war'), usable only while you are on 
your home plane, and each costs one action to perform.

The jihad command requires 5 Offence, and at least 2 must be Religion.  This 
attack automatically gets a bonus of +1 Offence.  If it wins, then each point 
you beat your opponent's Defence by will be converted into a point of damage, 
and you do an additional +1 damage afterwards.  If you inflict more than 3 
points of damage, you'll take a point of damage, otherwise you'll take 2 points
of damage.  Your opponent takes 2 damage on a draw, and 1 damage if they beat 
you, but in both cases you will also take 5 damage.

=== ENCUMBRANCE ===
Your encumbrance rating represents how much you are wearing, and affects you as
follows, colour-coded the same as the 'encumbrance' stat in your score:

Encumbrance is less than or equal to your Brawn: Unencumbered.  +5 Speed. 
You have access to all feet techniques.  Encumbrance coloured CYAN in your
score.  

Encumbrance is more than your Brawn: Light encumbrance.  +3 Speed.  Lose
access to acrobatic techniques.  Encumbrance coloured BLUE in your score.  

Encumbrance is more than two times your Brawn: Medium encumbrance.  No Speed
modifier.  Lose access to run and most kick techniques.  Encumbrance coloured
MAGENTA in your score.  

Encumbrance is more than three times your Brawn: Heavy encumbrance.  -5 Speed
(or half, whichever is better).  Can no longer jog, kick, or jump.  Encumbrance
coloured RED in your score.  

Your encumbrance is also subtracted from your Defence rating for your feet, 
and affects how quickly your locations can recover from preventing an attack.
Note that Encumbrance 25+ means you're always at least lightly encumbered, and 
50+ means you're always at least at medium encumbrance, regardless of Brawn.

=== DAMAGE ===
Damage represents the raw physical power of your character, and is calculated 
in six steps for each body location as follows:

1) Add together the stat modifiers and subtract any weapon penalties.
2) Add any modifiers for the weapon table and bonuses for the weapon itself.
3) Add any modifiers for magical items you're wearing.
4) Apply the percentage modifier if using a two-handed weapon.
5) Add bonuses from talents/powers that specifically state 'after percentages'.
6) Add any modifiers for spell affects.

The maximum damage you can inflict is then calculated by multiplying your 
Damage by a percentage value based on the difference between your Core Damage 
and your opponent's Resistance (see 'help resistance').  Note that percentage 
modifiers for fighting styles are ONLY applied to Core Damage.

The actual amount of damage you inflict will depend upon how well you hit your 
opponent, weighed increasingly in your favour the higher above 50% your chance 
to hit is.  With a 50% chance to hit you'll do an average of 25.7% damage per 
blow (treating misses as 0% damage).  This goes up to 31.82% at 55%, 38.75% at 
60%, 45.38% at 65%, 51.79% at 70%, 58.00% at 75%, 64.06% at 80%, 70.00% at 85%,
75.83% at 90% and 81.58% damage at 95% chance to hit.

In your score, your damage for each location is colour-coded to indicate its
bypass bonus - 20% of your weapon skill, 10% of your weapon skill, 5% of 
your weapon skill, or no bypass bonus.

See also: assist attack combat critical defence resistance

=== WHISPER ===
  - whisper <text>
  - whisper to <target> <text>

This command works in much the same way as 'say', except that you can only be 
heard by people within 5 feet.

See also: say shout

=== KARMA ===
If you belong to a pantheon, you will earn Karma while in the Nexus.  The 
amount of Karma earned is the same as the amount of Primal earned, minus your 
number of daily kills.  Once you've earned 1000 Karma, any further points are 
automatically transferred to your pantheon.  When you leave the Nexus (through
death, entering a task or shifting) then half of your current Karma will be 
transferred to your pantheon and the rest will be lost.

If you kill another player in the Nexus, they are old enough to give Primal, 
and both of you are in top 10 pantheons, then you will steal all Karma that 
they haven't yet transferred to their pantheon.  If you successfully steal 
any Karma from them, it will count as a pantheon kill.

Note that new recruits cannot earn Karma.  When someone joins a pantheon they 
remain a new recruit until the scoreboard resets at the end of the week.

See also: pantheon pantheons

=== WEAPON ===
  - weapon <left/right/head/feet>

This command will display the weapon used in the specified hand as if you had 
looked at it using 'look +<weapon name>'.  If you are not using a weapon, or 
are viewing your left or right hand, it will instead display the stats for the
specified location in the same format as it would a weapon.

Note that your appropriate weapon skill (uncapped, but not including Combat) is
applied as a multiplier to your wielded weapons' first 100 points in each of 
Attack, Defence and Damage.  The same applies to natural weapons.

=== GENDER ===
  - gender
  - gender <male/female>
  - gender <name> (test the gender analyser for the specified name)

This command allows you to change your gender - the Supernaturalis are never 
truly mortal, and can change gender at will.  Typing 'gender' on its own (while
on your home plane) will tell you whether you are currently male or female.

During the quickstart and concept character creation, your starting gender is 
chosen for you, to reduce the number of choices you need to make.  Some of the 
concepts give you a fixed starting gender (for example an amazon always starts 
female while a monk always starts male), while others have a random gender.

In the case of a random gender, the mud will analyse your name using pattern 
matching and a phonetic algorithm, comparing it with real names to choose your 
starting gender.  The name 'Player' sounds masculine (61% probability).

Note that this command is only available when you are on your home plane.

=== WHOIS ===
  - who
  - who brief/where/full/idle
  - whois <player>

The 'who' command will list which players are currently connected to the mud, 
with names colour-coded to indicate whether each player is in the outer Nexus,
the inner Nexus, a named Nexus area, a home plane (not necessarily their own) 
or somewhere else (such as the Realm, a dungeon, etc).  If you are classed, the
class names of other players in the Nexus will be colour-coded to indicate if 
they would or wouldn't give you primal, should you kill them.

Typing 'who brief' will list only the colour-coded player names, with a '*' 
indicating that the player is link-dead.

Typing 'who where' and 'who full' list where each player is located.

The 'whois' command allows you to view information about a specific player, 
such as when they last connected and how long they've played.  The 'finger' 
command is an alias for 'whois'.

=== PROTECTION ===
Your character has three defence ratings - one for your left hand, one for your
right hand, and one for your feet.  You cannot defend with your head, however -
instead, it has a Protection rating.  This rating is calculated in the same way
as Ascendancy (see 'help ascendancy') and allows you to defend against indirect
spells in exactly the same way as Defence lets you defend against direct spells
and physical attacks (see 'help defence').  Note that the highest of your Blue 
and Green magic colours is used when calculating your Protection.

Unlike Defence, Protection does not suffer a cooldown (see 'help cooldown'), 
and therefore your mental defences will always be in perfect condition, barring
pain penalties.

See also: magic defence ascendancy power penalties speed

=== SHIFT ===
  - shift

This command allows you to shift between the Realm plane and the Nexus.  The
process takes 9 seconds when travelling from the Realm, or 30 seconds from the 
Nexus, and cannot be performed while your adrenaline rush is active.  If it 
becomes active while you are in the process of using this ability, your planar 
shift will be interrupted.  You may also choose to interrupt the planar shift 
at any time by typing 'shift' before the process is complete.

Note that this command will only work when you are in the material plane, and 
will not change your coordinate position.  When your shift is complete, those
with supernatural senses may detect the power surge of your arrival, although 
this will depend on how powerful their senses are and how far away from them 
you appear.

See also: nexus realm

=== SWAP ===
  - swap

This command swaps the content of your left and right hands.  If this is done 
during combat, it will not affect any techniques currently in progress - they 
will simply continue with the new hand.

See also: wear wield remove get give drop

=== WHAT ===
  - what

Do you sometimes find yourself wondering 'What should I do now?'.

If so, the answer is simple - type 'what'.

You can type 'what' at any time.  It will give you a suggestion for what you 
can do next - you don't have to follow the suggestion of course, but if you're 
not really sure what to do it can point you in the right direction.

=== FAME ===
Fame and Glory are earned from the Great War (see 'help great war').  They are 
earned at the same rate, but your Fame cannot exceed 10% of your Age and never 
goes down, while Glory has no maximum but goes down as it is spent.

You may use the 'epic' command to add your Glory points to your epic items and 
customise their bonuses, with each point of Glory adding 1 Fame, 25 radiation 
and 50 epic points to the item.  These epic points are then spent to add actual
bonuses.  Note that you can only use one epic item at a time, and cannot use or
create epic items that have a higher Fame rating than you.

See also: epic

=== LOAD ===
  - load <name> <password>

This command allows you to load the character of the specified name, assuming 
that you know the password.  The character must already have been created 
before it can be loaded up.

See also: create

=== AGE ===
The Supernaturalis do not grow old like mortals do, and the rules of time do 
not apply to them like they do to us.  A Supernaturalis 'ages' by focusing 
their innate Primal energy to strengthen their physical form, often reaching 
full maturity within minutes of being born.

An Imbued Supernaturalis is able to strengthen their form even further by 
absorbing primal energy from those they slay and then focusing it to train 
their attributes and raise their supernatural powers.

Your Age stat (also called 'Divine Age') is equal to the total of your Primary
stats, before magical adjustments.  Your Divine Age is 500.

=== REALM ===
The Realm plane is where you initially start, and consists of three main 
islands.  On the main island is Glyphstone village, which consists of a few 
buildings.  Outside of the village it is possible to encounter wild animals 
and the occasional monster, but for real challenges (and magical treasure) 
you should explore the monster lairs which dot the landscape.

There is also a graphical version of the map available on the website, which 
you can visit here: http://www.godwars2.org/realmplane.php

The Realm plane is non-PK, providing a reasonably safe way to explore, but 
once you're classed it probably won't offer you much of a challenge any more.
At this point you should use the 'shift' command to enter the Nexus.

See also: area nexus shift

=== ARCHERY ===
Bows and crossbows are specialised two-handed weapons.  You should first swap 
them to your off-hand (see 'help swap'), and then assist with your other hand 
(see 'help assist').  This is because you won't be using the hand holding the 
bow - in archery, you use your primary hand to draw the string.

Make sure you are wearing a quiver (or a case of bolts if using a crossbow) and
then use the load command with your assisting hand (i.e., 'll' for left load, 
or 'rl' for right load, depending on which hand is assisting).  You will have 
to reload again after you fire.

If you are using elementally enhanced arrows or crossbow bolts, you can use the
charge command to charge them up before firing.  Non-charged arrows and bolts 
perform burst attacks on a critical hit, while charged arrows and bolts only 
need to successfully hit your opponent in order to perform a burst attack.

Arrows and crossbow bolts can be blocked with shields, deflected with magical 
defences such as forcefields, or dodged.  A dodge only has half its normal 
defence when used against ranged weapons, however.  Certain talents, such as 
Expert Marksman, can help make bows a more viable choice.

=== TITAN ===
Titans are a powerful race of elder deities, born from the primal forces of 
the universe.  They gain the following stat bonuses:

=== PETS ===
Various spells and powers will allow you to summon creatures to serve you.  You
may order these creatures to perform actions by directing a 'say' at them - for
example 'say to wolf follow me' or 'say to elemental kill goblin'.

Available orders are: Kill, stop, style, get, drop, give, accept, wear, remove,
perch, enter, leave, heal, follow, advance, north, south, east, west.

Note that 'stop' will stop the pet attacking.  The 'advance' command will cause
the pet to start moving faster, if it can.  Only specific creatures are able to
obey the heal and perch commands.

If you give the 'leave' order to a pet summoned with a spell, it will try to 
leave it's current location (just like a player).  If the pet was summoned with
a class power, the 'leave' command will make it vanish.

All pets have 'pet' as an extra keyword.  You may also address all of your pets
at once by typing 'say @pets <order>'.

See also: pscore

=== HEALING ===
Five seconds after being struck in combat, you will start healing at half your 
regen rate.  After an additional ten seconds you will start healing at your 
full regen rate.  Your full regen rate is 0.5 health per second, plus bonuses 
from powers, spells and equipment, with your green magic then being applied as 
a percentage bonus to the end result.  Fractions are stored and added later.

For example, if you have 4 ranks in Regeneration and 100 in green magic, your 
full regen rate would be 0.5 + 2.0 = 2.5, modified by green magic = 5 health 
per second.  Your half regen rate would be 2.5 health per second, meaning that 
you'd heal 2 health the first second, 3 health the next, then 2, then 3, etc.

Please note that your regen rate will be reset the moment you are successfully 
struck by another player, regardless of whether any damage was actually caused 
by the blow.  If your regen rate is 1.0 or higher (0.5 base plus at least 0.5 
from powers, spells or equipment) then being struck will only cause you to fall
back to your half regen rate, unless the blow was a critical hit.

You may also eat food to recover health more quickly (see 'help eat').

See also: cap replenishment

=== STOP ===
  - stop <l/r/f/h>
  - stop

This command is designed to stop you from both moving and fighting.  It will 
stop you from performing any location-based actions with your left or right 
hand, and will stop your legs from performing any movement-based techniques 
such as walking or jogging (although it will not stop jumps, ducks or kicks).

This command also clears any stacked-up commands in your command queue.

Note that you may specifically choose to just clear your left hand, right 
hand, feet or head by typing 'stop l', 'stop r', 'stop f' or 'stop h' 
respectively.  You may also use the shortcuts 'l!', 'r!', 'f!' and 'h!'.

See also: clear

=== WAR2 ===

=== GODWARS ===
The original God Wars was created in 1995, and is based upon Merc 2.1 (by 
Mitchell Tse, Michael Chastain and Michael Quan) which in turn is based upon 
DikuMUD (by Katja Nyboe, Tom Madsen, Hans Henrik Staerfeldt, Michael Seifert 
and Sebastian Hammer).  The God Wars code is available for public download, 
although no further work has been done on it since 1998.  God Wars itself 
eventually changed direction, being renamed to Dark City, then later to Last 
City, as it took a gradual turn towards RP in a World of Darkness setting.  
Sadly, development on Last City eventually ground to a halt in 2001.

God Wars II has been written from scratch, but draws upon many of the ideas 
and much of the inspiration of the original God Wars, as well as some of the 
technical concepts utilised in Last City and Gladiator Pits.  We wouldn't be 
where we are today were it not for the valuable lessons we learned from the 
past, and for that we extend our thanks to the Diku and Merc teams, as well 
as all those who contributed towards the original God Wars.

=== TUTORIAL2 ===
Continued from 'help tutorial':

To view the full combat table for your right hand, type 'r?'.  On the first 
line you'll see a list of one-letter commands - these are the options that can 
be typed after the 'r', with their cost in action points listed in brackets 
afterwards.  Below the valid commands is a brief definition of what each 
command means, and underneath that is a table of fighting techniques.

Each time you type your two-letter command, the second letter is added to a 
queue, which is then used to determine which technique you'll perform.  You 
should be able to see the 'fs' jab (which you performed with 'rf' followed by 
'rs') as well as the 'fss' hook (which you performed with the second 'rs'), as 
well as various other techniques.  Try some of the other commands, and then try
doing the same with your left hand (exactly the same process, but the first 
letter of the command is 'l').  Then type 'draw all' to draw your weapons, and 
see what combos you can perform with them.

You may also find it useful to read 'help techniques' and 'help assist'.

=== TUTORIAL ===
When learning the combat system, it is useful to remember the two-letter rule:
Every combat command is two letters long.

The first letter specifies which location the command should use: 'l' (left
hand), 'r' (right hand), 'f' (feet) or 'h' (head).  The second letter is the
action performed, and the choice of actions depends on your combat table.  To 
view a combat table for any location, use the '?' action, e.g. 'r?'.

Make sure your weapons are sheathed ('sheathe all'), and try throwing a punch
with your right hand by typing 'rs' (right strike).  Next, try a jab.  A jab is
a combo technique - a fist move followed by a strike: type 'rf' (right fist),
then 'rs' (right strike) as separate commands - remember the two-letter rule!
There is also a hook combo, a fist move followed by two strike moves - but
you've already done the first two for your jab, so to follow up with a hook,
all you need to do is another 'rs' (right strike).

One special exception to the two-letter rule is enhanced moves, where you can
add a '+' after the second letter - but best not to worry about those for now.

To learn more, please type 'help tutorial2'.

=== RATE ===
Your movement rate is calculate in fps (feet per second), as follows:

Walking rate: (Size/3) + 3 - Encumbrance Level + (Athletics/100) + Misc.
Jogging rate: (Size/3) + 10 - (Encumbrance Level * 2) + (Athletics/50) + Misc.
Running rate: (Size/3) + 20 - (Encumbrance Level * 4) + (Athletics/25) + Misc.

Mounted walking rate: 10 + (Riding/100) + Misc.
Mounted jogging rate: 20 + (Riding/50) + Misc.
Mounted running rate: 40 + (Riding/25) + Misc.

Your Encumbrance Level is 0 if you are unencumbered, 1 for light encumbrance, 2
for medium encumbrance and 3 for heavy encumbrance.

Misc refers to any bonuses from powers, magic items and spells.  The end result
is then capped at 66.  Penalties from wounds are applied after the cap, so that
if you've been hamstrung in one leg, your movement rate can never exceed 61.

Different terrain types may also apply a penalty: -1 for deserts, ice or rocky 
ground, -2 for mountains, forests and swamps, -3 when wading in shallow water, 
-4 for swimming in deep water, and -5 for quicksand, whirlpools and lava.

=== TRAIN ===
  - train <primary stat>
  - train subclass <subclass>
  - train reroll

This command allows you to train 6 of your 8 primary stats - Brawn, Grace, 
Mettle, Wits, Tenacity and Discipline (Size and Aura cannot be trained).  
Every time you train a stat, the mud will randomly train another stat for 
you, based on your subclass.

You may also use the train command to select a subclass (see 'help subclass') 
and to reroll your stats.  The latter will clear your subclass and talents, as
well as your trained stats and powers, and give you a corresponding number of 
free stat and power trains - but it can only be done once per calendar month.

See also: stats subclass

=== SHIELDS ===
Shields are specialised weapons which focus on defence.  They are also able to 
soak damage in much the same way as armour (see 'help armour').

Small shields only protect the hands and arms by default, but when wielded they
provide techniques for extending their protection to additional locations.  It 
is also possible to sheathe small shields.

Large shields protect a wide range of fixed locations, but cannot be sheathed.

The soak of a shield is halved during cooldown, or if the shield is currently 
performing a technique (if both are true, the soak is only halved once).  The 
Rapid Shield Block talent prevents this penalty from being applied.

If you are holding a shield in each hand, their soak is not combined.  Instead, 
only the highest soak for each particular location and damage type will apply.

Shields do not provide auto-absorb, unless they are sheathed.

See also: armour armour2 cooldown

=== EAT ===
  - eat <thing>

The Supernaturalis are not required to eat food, but they often find it useful
to do so because of the rapid speed at which their powerful metabolism can 
break it down, providing a boost to their natural healing.

When you eat a piece of food, it will usually take a few seconds to chew 
before being automatically swallowed.  Once swallowed it will instantly heal 
you of some damage and your stomach will start trying to digest it to make 
space for more food.  If you try to eat too much too quickly, you'll become 
stuffed and have to wait for your digestive system to catch up.

Note that different types of food can be eaten and digested at different 
speeds, and provide variable amounts of healing.  If you wish to eat while 
your adrenaline rush is active, it will cost you one hundred action points.

Your speed is reduced by 1 when your stomach contains food, 2 if you're stuffed
or 3 if you're sick.  In addition, your cooldown suffers a +1 penalty while you
are eating (i.e., after typing 'eat' until you receive the 'swallow' message).

=== SHOUT ===
  - shout <text>
  - shout to <target> <text>

This command works in much the same way as 'say' except that you can be heard 
by everyone within 10000 feet.

See also: say whisper

=== TILE ===
  - tile
  - tilematch
  - tilematch next

These commands only work within your home plane.  Type 'tile' to view the data 
of the tile you're currently standing on.  A tile consists of 10 by 10 plots, 
each of which is a terrain type.  For example tile 2 consists of 10 by 10 plots
of plain, while tile 103 is the same except for having a river flowing through 
it (thus including plots for riverbank and east-flowing river).  You will also 
see whether or not the current tile matches the surrounding tiles.

The 'tilematch' command checks your entire home plane for non-matching tiles, 
starting with the bottom left corner and finishing with the top right corner.  
The search will be stopped if a non-matching tile is found, and you will be 
transported to that location.  If you type 'tilematch next', you will move on 
to the next non-matching tile.

See also: terraform home zone

=== TERRAFORM ===
  - terraform <ocean/lake/plain/forest/mountain/desert/marsh>
  - terraform next

This command only works within your home plane.  Type 'terraform plain' to 
change the ocean in your current tile to solid plain, and the surrounding 8 
tiles will be converted to coast.  Type 'area' to see your entire plane, and 
use 'nn', 'ss', 'ee' and 'ww' commands to move one or more tiles at a time.

Only a plain can go right up to the ocean, so in order to create forests, 
mountains, etc, you'll need to make a larger plain first and then place the 
new terrain type in the centre of that.

You may also type 'terraform next', which will cycle to the next tile that 
fits your current location without changing any of the surrounding tiles (for
example you might have a pond or a clearing in your forest).  To view the 
metadata for your current tile, type 'tile'.

See also: home tile zone

=== TELL ===
  - tell <person> <message>
  - tell <number of previous messages you wish to view>
  - tell

This allows you to send a private message to another player, regardless of 
distance.  This message is sent between accounts rather than characters.

If you type 'tell' on its own, you'll see the last 20 tells or replies that 
other people have sent you, along with how long ago they were sent.  You can 
also specify the number of tells you wish to see, for example 'tell 5' will 
display the last five tells you'd been sent

See also: reply replylock ignore

=== STORE ===
  - store <1-10>

This command allows you to summon an equipment store from the ground.  You have
10 separate stores, and each can hold up to 25 items.  Enter the store, drop 
the items you want to keep inside, and they'll automatically save for the next
time you visit.

You may only have one store summoned at any one time, but it will vanish after
a while if there are no players inside it (this may take up to 30 seconds).

See also: home

=== TECHNIQUES ===
Highlighted techniques are those granted by your current fighting style, while 
those coloured cyan are available because of the weapon in your other hand (see
'help assist'), and highlighted cyan means both.  Equally, yellow indicates a 
technique specific to your encumbrance (or because you're mounted) while green 
represents a combination of yellow and cyan.  Purple means the technique is 
available because of a talent you possess.

You should also be aware of the special characters; '*' is automatically added
whenever a technique requires you to act within a limited time frame (such as 
when jumping, or after catching an opponent's blade with your own), '-' means 
you are falling, '_' is added whenever you fall onto the ground, and '#' means
that you're entangled by something (such as a net).

As well as techniques, your combat table also colours other things - if the 
Delay is coloured red, that means it includes the penalty for your off-hand. 
Att(ack) is coloured to indicate its attack strength, just as Def(ence) is for 
defence strength and Dam(age) for its bypass bonus.  To see how these modifiers
are applied, and to learn what the attack and defence strengths mean, see 'help
attack', 'help defence' and 'help damage'.

See also: assist attack combat defence kill interleaving

=== TASKS ===
  - tasks
  - task <name of task>

This command displays your list of current tasks.  Each character may only 
complete each task once, and each task gives a special reward.  Completing 
a task may also result in new tasks being unlocked.

You can type 'task <name of task>' or 'help <name of task>' to find out more 
information about each specific task, including what reward it gives.

Some tasks take place in dungeons.  The 'find' and 'area' commands can make it 
easier to locate the entrances to such dungeons, and you should probably also 
fabricate a wand before you set off (see 'help fabricate').

=== TARGET ===
  - target <thing>
  - target <x coordinate> <y coordinate>
  - target clear

This allows you to target something in the world.  This target is then used to
allow relative movement such as advancing and retreating, as well as being used
as an 'opponent' in combat.

You may also use this command to target a specific x/y coordinate location 
in the world.

Note that if you are currently moving towards a specific coordinate location, 
that destination will be lost in favour of the new target.

See also: mtarget

=== HELP ===
  - help
  - help <subject>

This command will display the help information on the specified subject, if 
there is any available.  If no matching keyword is found, the mud will 
provide you with some similar-sounding suggestions.  Typing 'help' without 
any parameters will list the help topics available.

=== TALENTS ===
  - talents
  - talent <list/all/vampire/mage/werewolf/demon/dragon/titan>
  - talent category <category name>
  - talent <talent name>
  - talent add/drop <talent name>

This command without any arguments displays your current talents, along with a 
summary of each, while 'talent list' shows all talents for which you qualify.

You may also type 'talent all' to show every talent, 'talent category <name>' 
to show all talents of a specified category, or 'talent <class name>' to show 
all talents of a specified class.  These three options colour-code the talents 
to indicate those you've got, those you do qualify for, and those you don't.

You may view the specific details of a talent by typing 'talent' or 'help' 
followed by the talent name - for example 'help mind over matter'.

You may add a talent to your character by typing 'talent add <talent name>', as
long as you have a free slot.  You start with three talent slots, and earn a 
fourth by mastering (i.e., getting to 100) five skills (any of core skills, 
weapons and magic).  You earn a fifth talent slot when you master your first 
super fighting style.  You also earn a free Weapon Mastery talent by mastering 
five weapon skills, a second Weapon Mastery talent by mastering eight weapon 
skills, and a third Weapon Mastery talent by mastering all ten weapon skills.

Classed characters also gain a new talent at age 100, another at age 200, etc.

=== RESTORE ===
  - restore
  - restore <creature>

This command allows you to fully restore yourself or the specified creature, 
returning the target to maximum health, mana and action points, and removing 
any wounds they have received.

Note that you only have access to this command while on your home plane.

See also: home wounds

=== INVITE ===
  - invite <player>
  - join <player>
  - banish <player>

The invite command only works within your home plane.  It allows you to invite
another player to join you within your home plane, which they can accept by  
typing 'join Player'.

The banish command allows you to get rid of guests who have outstayed their 
welcome, sending them back to their own home plane.  This will also work on 
people who are in your stores, and you don't need to be able to see the 
person you banish.

See also: home

=== TACK ===
  - tack

This command shows whatever your mount is currently wearing.

See also: equipment put mount dismount

=== MEASUREMENTS ===
God Wars II uses imperial units to measure lengths and distances.  This was 
partly done because it seemed more appropriate than metric for a non-modern 
setting, but also because one foot was considered a nicer unit than one metre 
when it comes to measuring the reach of a weapon (particularly a melee weapon).

The smallest unit of measurement is a foot, which is approximately 30 cm.  3 
feet make a yard, which is slightly under 1 metre.  22 yards (or 66 feet) make 
a chain, which is approximately 20 metres.  10 chains (or 220 yards/660 feet) 
make a furlong, which is approximately 200 metres.  8 furlongs (or 80 chains/ 
1760 yards/5280 feet) make a mile, which is approximately 1.6 kilometres.

=== ITEMS ===
Magical items come in any combination of five types and three rarities.  The 
types are magical, legendary, mythical, relic and artifact, and depend on the 
age of the monster they drop from.  The rarities are common, uncommon and rare,
and these drop 89%, 10% and 1% of the time respectively (regardless of type).

A common magical item will have 1-2 bonuses.  Each type beyond magical will 
increase the number of bonuses by 1, and each rarity beyond common increases 
the number of bonuses by 2.  Thus a rare artifact will have 9-10 bonuses.

The actual bonuses will be randomly generated depending on the item, and to a 
lesser extent the material and type.  Some bonuses can be applied multiple 
times, others only once.  Some items (eg fangs) may only allow a single bonus.

The radiation is calculated by adding up the bonus costs (every bonus has its 
own cost).  Each bonus beyond the first reduces the radiation by 5%, up to a 
maximum of 25%, and each bonus beyond that reduces the radiation by 2%.  Each 
type beyond magical reduces the radiation by 2% and each rarity beyond common 
reduces the radiation by 5%.  The mud then randomly applies an extra modifier 
between -5% and +5%.  The total radiation cannot be below 50% of the base.

=== BACKSTAB ===
If you have the Assassin Training talent, you gain the ability to backstab or 
throatslit your opponents while standing behind them.  To do this, you first 
need to know which direction your opponent is facing by typing 'display $o', or
by adding '$o' to your prompt.

An easy way to get behind your opponent is to move two feet opposite to the 
direction they are facing, then type either 'rs' (right slash) to slit their 
throat, or 'rt' (right thrust) to backstab them. If you have the Mighty Blow 
talent you can enhance your attack by adding a '+' (i.e., 'rs+' or 'rt+').

Another option is to circle around your opponent with the 'fl' (feet left) and 
'fr' (feet right) commands.  You automatically stop once you're behind them.

You can also check whether an opponent can be backstabed by typing 'display $B'
or by setting your backstab colour (see 'help colour').  Remember, in order to 
backstab or throatslit an opponent you must also have the weapon mastery talent
for the weapon you're using (see 'help Assassin Training').

Note that you can always perform a backstab on someone who can't see you, even 
if you're not technically behind them.

=== STYLE ===
  - style <style name>
 
There are 25 different fighting styles: five basic, ten advanced and ten super.
Each style provides various special combat techniques which are only available 
with certain weapons (these are highlighted in the technique table), as well 
as percentage bonuses to one or more of Attack, Defence, Damage, Speed and 
Resistance, as reflected in your score.  Please note that the style bonuses 
for Attack, Defence and Damage are also applied to their magical counterparts 
Ascendancy, Protection and Power respectively.

The basic styles are Crane (Defence), Mongoose (Attack), Bull (Damage), Crab
(Resistance) and Viper (Speed).

The advanced styles are Bear (Attack and Damage), Monkey (Attack and Defence), 
Swallow (Attack and Resistance), Cobra (Attack and Speed), Eagle (Damage and 
Defence), Tiger (Damage and Speed), Dragon (Damage and Resistance), Mantis 
(Defence and Speed), Scorpion (Defence and Resistance) and Fox (Resistance and 
Speed).

The super styles are Hawk (Attack, Damage and Defence), Rhino (Attack, Damage 
and Resistance), Lion (Attack, Damage and Speed), Ape (Attack, Defence and 
Resistance), Asp (Attack, Defence and Speed), Serpent (Attack, Resistance and 
Speed), Leopard (Damage, Defence and Speed), Hydra (Damage, Defence and 
Resistance), Wolf (Damage, Resistance and Speed) and Flea (Defence, Resistance 
and Speed).

=== GRAPHICS ===
God Wars II offers a graphical interface in the form of a custom MUSHclient 
plugin.  You can see some screenshots of it here:

   http://www.godwars2.org/screenshots.php

Instructions for downloading and installing it can be found here:

   http://www.godwars2.org/plugins.php

If you have done this correctly you will be using MUSHclient 4.51 or higher, 
and the MSDP protocol.  Type 'whois Player' to verify these details.

See also: hotkey

=== SAY ===
  - say <text>
  - say @<target> <text>
  - say @pets <text> (see 'help pets')

This command allows your character to speak out loud.  You will be heard by 
everyone within 1000 feet (although it will not carry outside your current 
location).  You may also choose to direct your speech at a specific person, by
typing 'to <their name>' before the text ('@' also works instead of 'to').

Note that if you place a smiley at the end of your spoken text, it will add an
emote to your 'say' message.  This smiley can be one of: ':)' (smile), ';)' 
(wink), ':P' (grin), ':D' (laugh), ':>' (giggle), ':(' (frown), ':O' (gasp), 
':o' (sigh), ':*' (snort), ':}' (chuckle), ':/' (grimace), ':x' (whistle), ':{'
(pout), ':\' (sneer), ':]' (smirk), ':[' (scowl), ':X' (snarl) or ':#' (groan).

You may also prefix the text with '+' for affirmative (a nod of the head), '-'
for negative (a shake of the head), '%' for rolling your eyes, '^' to raise an
eyebrow or '~' to shrug your shoulders.  Eg try typing 'say +I understand! :)'.

Due to popular request, the ' character has been added as an alias for 'say'.

See also: shout whisper

=== ACTIONS ===
Your action points, sometimes called AP (and referred to as 'Actions' in your 
score) are an abstract way of reflecting how fast you can fight.  Each second 
you gain a number of action points equal to your Speed, although this cannot 
exceed your speed cap.  You then spend these action points to perform various 
combat techniques, eat food, rewield disarmed weapons, and so on.

Your maximum action points are 800, plus 20 for each point of Speed.  Your true
Speed stat (before the cap) is used when calculating this maximum.

If you enter a rage (for example via Berserker Rage, or a class power) and your
maximum number of action points increases, your current action points will also
increase by the same amount.  These extra action points will vanish when the 
rage ends, unless doing so would take you below 0.

If your action points fall below 0, you become fatigued (see 'help fatigue').

See also: speed combat eat wield

=== STANCE ===
  - stance <style>
  - stance

This is a shortcut command designed to move your feet into a fighting stance 
appropriate for your current fighting style (see 'help style').  You may also
provide a style name as an argument, which will set your fighting style at 
the same time.

Note that this command will clear your feet location of any actions before 
moving you into a stance.  In addition, there may not always be a stance 
available, depending on the style you're using and the amount of encumbrance 
you're carrying.

=== SUBCLASS ===
  - subclass
  - subclass list
  - subclass show <name of subclass>
  - subclass raise/lower <power>
  - subclass reset

This command, when typed on its own, views your current subclass.  You may also
use list all available subclasses for your class, view a specific subclass, or 
customise your current subclass by raising and lower power bonuses.

When customising your subclass powers, you cannot raise any power above +2, +4 
or +6 (for age 200, 300 and 400 subclasses respectively), unless it was higher 
than that originally.  Nor may you have more than one power that isn't normally
granted by your subclass.

If your subclass gives a free talent, then you will always have that talent, 
regardless of whether or not you fulfill the requirements.  If it conflicts 
with one of your existing talents, you will lose the old talent.

If your subclass gives power bonuses, you must have at least 1 rank in the 
power before you will benefit from that bonus.  If you don't have any ranks 
then the bonus will be coloured red in 'subclass <subclass name>', and won't 
show a '+X' after your rank in the power when you type 'powers'.  The bonuses 
count as ranks, except for meeting the requirements to raise other powers.

Note that in order to train a subclass you must be at least age 200.  You will
not be able to rise above age 200 until you have trained your first subclass.

See also: class train powers

=== POWERS ===
  - powers
  - powers spheres
  - power raise/lower <power name>
  - power raise/lower <number of ranks> <power name>

A power is a special ability available to Supernaturalis of a certain class.
It cannot be increased through use, only by the expenditure of Primal.  Like 
talents, each character has a limited number of available powers.

You may have a number of points in your powers equal to your (Age*Age)/1000, 
however your three highest powers don't count towards this total.  Further, no
power may have more ranks than your Age/10 (rounded down).  Thus as an age 100
character you could have 3 powers at 10, and another 10 points distributed 
however you please.

To view your current powers, type 'powers'.  If a power is coloured red, then
you don't fulfill all of its requirements, and therefore cannot raise it at 
this time (type 'help <power name>' to view the requirements).

You may also lower a power while in your home plane.  The mud keeps track of 
powers you've lowered, and allows you to raise that number of new powers for 
no primal cost - so feel free to try out the different powers.

=== FIND ===
  - find <area/dungeon/building>

This command will show you the approximate distance and direction of the 
specified area, dungeon or building.

See also: area

=== SPHERES ===
  - spheres add <new sphere>
  - spheres swap <old sphere> <new sphere>

This command allows you to specify your pantheon's spheres of influence.  You 
may add a primary sphere for free, but the secondary sphere costs 100000 soul 
points, while the tertiary sphere costs 250000 soul points.

You may also swap your spheres for other spheres, but this may impact members 
of the pantheon if they are relying on the sphere you change.

Only the Supreme God of the pantheon can add or swap the spheres.

See also: pantheon

=== SPEED ===
Speed indicates the attack speed of your character.  Each second, you gain a 
number of action points (APs) equal to your Speed rating which can then be 
spent on performing combat techniques.  This statistic is rounded down to the 
nearest whole number, and is calculated as follows:

1) Add your Grace to double your Wits, and divide the result by 3.
2) Add any bonuses from class powers.
3) Apply multiplier based on fighting style.
4) Add any bonuses/penalties from spells, items or encumbrance.

Your Speed has a maximum cap (usually 25-35, depending on encumbrance).  Each 
full point of Speed beyond the Speed cap will be converted into 1 point in each
of Attack, Defence, Ascendancy and Protection, applied at the same time as your
primary stats.

Your maximum action points are 800, plus 20 for each point of Speed.  Your 
true Speed stat (before the cap) is used when calculating this maximum.

See also: actions encumbrance stats

=== SOCIALS ===
  - socials
  - socials <begins with>
  - <social name>
  - <social name> <social type>
  - <social name> <target>
  - <social name> <social type> <target>

This command lists all available socials, optionally listing only those that
begin with a certain character sequence.  To perform a social, simply type the
name of the social as if it were a command - for example type 'smile' if you
wish Player to smile.  You may also specify a social type - for example 'smile
shyly' or 'smile coldly'.  If you do not explicitly specify a type, the default
for that particular social will be used.  To view the available types for a
particular social, type the social followed by 'types' - for example 'smile
types' to list the different types of smile.

You may also aim your socials at a specific person by using 'to' or '@'
followed by a target name.  In this case ordering is irrelevant - either 'grin
@Player evilly' or 'grin evilly @Player' are fine.

=== CREATE ===
  - create <name> <password>

This command allows you to create a character of the specified name, with the 
specified password.  If you have already previously created the character, you 
should use the 'load' command to load it up.

See also: load

=== GREAT WAR ===
At 11pm mud time (i.e., every 6 real-life hours) the God of War initiates a 
Great War.  At midnight mud time (i.e., 15 minutes later) the Lords of War 
join (1 for each player, up to a maximum of 40) and the Great War begins.

A Great War is played in the same way as a planar war (see 'help war'), except 
each turn lasts only 30 seconds, and you must kill two Lords before you can 
attack the God or another player (unless all the Lords are dead).  The maximum 
number of Lords who can attack you each turn is initially 2, +1 for every Lord 
or player you kill.  This maximum doesn't apply to players attacking you.

Every kill you make (either Lord or player) gives 1 recruit point, which can
be used to recruit special individuals - see 'help recruit'.

If you survive the Great War, you earn 1 point of Fame and Glory.  You earn an 
extra point if you also kill one or more Lords, and a third point if you kill 
the God.  If you die, you gain nothing, even if you killed a Lord or the God.

=== SELL ===
  - sell <object> for <amount>
  - sell <object> <creature> for <amount>
  - sell <object> to <creature> for <amount>
  - sell <creature> <object> for <amount>
  - sell to <creature> <object> for <amount>

  - buy/view <object>
  - buy/view <object> <creature>
  - buy/view <object> from <creature>
  - buy/view <creature> <object>
  - buy/view from <creature> <object>

Buy and sell work much like give and accept, except they allow you to exchange
items for a specified price (see 'help soul points').  The offer to sell will 
remain open for 30 seconds.  You may also use the view command to see the stats
of the item being sold.

Note that '@' is an alias for 'to' (and 'from' when buying an object).

See also: give accept

=== SKILLS ===
You have five core skills.  Core skills increase with use, although the higher
they get the slower they increase.  You can use boosts to raise them faster 
(see 'help boost'), but they must still be used in order to raise them.  The 
highest a skill can get to is 100, or your Age, whichever is higher.

Combat represents your general fighting ability.  It goes up as you fight, and 
is added to all of your weapon skills when calculating their bonuses.

Athletics represents your physical fitness.  It is applied to your health as a 
percentage (see 'help health') and also increases your movement speed.

Riding represents your skill at riding mounts.  While mounted this skill works 
like a weapon skill for your feet, and like Athletics for movement speed.

Meditate works in the same way as Combat, but is applied to magic colours.

Focus is applied as a percentage modifier to your mana (see 'help mana').

=== TITLE ===
  - title <pantheon name>

This command allows you to set the title name for your pantheon, which then 
appears beside the names of your pantheon's deities on the 'who' list.  Only 
the Supreme God of the pantheon can set the title, and it only appears after 
it has been authorised by an admin.

If no title has been set (or authorised), your pantheon's name will use the 
default of 'Player's pantheon'.

Also note that no title will appear anywhere if your religion is based on 
monotheism.  This option is for players who have no interest in the concept 
of clans, but still want the benefits of bonus powers.

See also: pantheon who titlebrackets titlecolours

=== TITLEBRACKETS ===
  - titlebrackets <opening brackets>

This command allows you to set the brackets that are placed around your 
pantheon title on the 'who' list.  Only the Supreme God of the pantheon can 
set the brackets, although they may be changed at any time.

The opening brackets must be two characters in length, and only certain 
characters are permitted.  The closing brackets are calculated automatically.

See also: pantheon who title titlecolours

=== SETUP ===
  - setup

This command provides you with some hints and tips about your current 
character setup - specifically about your stats and equipment.  Please 
note that it should only be used as a guideline for new players, while 
more experienced players should feel free to ignore it.

See also: build

=== HANDED ===
  - handed
  - handed <left/right>

This command allows you to view or change your primary hand.  Your other hand 
(i.e., your off-hand) suffers a +1 cooldown penalty (see 'help cooldown'), and
any commands performed with it cost an extra five action points and take an 
extra second to execute.  The 'Delay' column for your off-hand will have its 
entries coloured MAGENTA to indicate the 1 second penalty.

If you have the Ambidextrous talent, you don't have an off-hand.

Note that this command is only available when you are on your home plane.

=== PRAY ===
  - pray <message>
  - pray <number of previous messages you wish to view>
  - pray

This command broadcasts your message to every deity in your pantheon who is 
currently online.  If you don't specify a message, then you'll see the last 
20 messages made, along with how long ago they were made.  The channel can be 
switched on and off by typing 'config pray' (see 'help config').

Note that this command is only available if you belong to a pantheon.

See also: ignore

=== SAVE ===
Some muds require the player to manually type 'save'.  In God Wars II the 
process is automatic, but if you really like typing it you can create an 
alias as follows: 'alias add save display Ok.'

See also: alias

=== PAIN ===
Your pain modifier represents penalties to Attack and Defence caused by your
injuries, and provides modifiers as follows (colour-coded the same as the 'pain
mod' rating in your score):

Current Health is at 75% or more of your maximum Health: No penalty.  Your
pain modifier will be coloured CYAN in your score.  

Current Health is at 50% or more of your maximum Health: -10% Attack and
Defence.  Your pain modifier will be coloured BLUE in your score.  

Current Health is at 25% or more of your maximum Health: -25% Attack and
Defence.  Your pain modifier will be coloured MAGENTA in your score.  

Current Health is less than 25% of your maximum Health: -50% Attack and
Defence.  Your pain modifier will be coloured RED in your score.  

Your pain modifier only affects Attack and Defence, but can still put you at a
serious disadvantage.  Note that certain talents or abilities may reduce or
even completely negate pain penalties.

=== SAFE ===
  - safe
  - safe off

This command will show you whether or not you're currently safe from PK.  While
on your home plane you may also type 'safe off' to switch off safe mode.

If you are killed by another player and have at least 1 active boost remaining,
you will be safe from PK (Player Killing) until you quit, use your last active 
boost, or enter a magical node, task location or duelling arena.  The safety 
also vanishes after half an hour, or an hour if the death earned you primal.

If you are killed while you have 0 active boosts, you will remain vulnerable to
PK - typing 'boost' afterwards will not help.

Note that if you have safe mode on and have reached your primal cap, you don't 
earn any soul points for your kills.

See also: boost death home

=== BANNER ===
  - banner
  - banner line <1-32> <letter/s>
  - banner column <1-64> <letter/s>
  - banner <1-32> <1-64> <letter>
  - banner replace <old letter> <new letter>
  - banner copy <from line> <to line>

This command allows you to design a banner for your pantheon.  The banner must 
be 64 characters wide and 32 characters high, and consist solely of letters.

The letters will be converted into coloured pixels: B/G/R/Y/M/C for light blue,
green, red, yellow, magenta and cyan, lower case letters for dark colours.  You
may also use A/J/L/P/V/T/O for the extended colours azure, jade, lime, pink, 
violet, tan and orange.  'W' is bright white, while 'w' is more of a grey, and 
any other letter is black.

For example, to make line 10 all light blue, type 'banner line 10 B', to make 
column 1 orange, type 'banner column 1 RY' (it will alternate red and yellow, 
which will appear orange on the banner).  To turn the top left character dark 
red type 'banner 1 1 r'.

This command only works on your home plane, and is available to the Supreme and
Major Gods.  The banner will be shown on the MWI (http://www.godwars2.org/mwi).

=== SACRIFICE ===
  - sacrifice <number of soul points>

This command transfers the specified number of soul points from your character
to your pantheon.  There is no direct benefit in doing this, but when being 
promoted by anything below a Major God, you must have contributed at least 
enough soul points to cover the cost of your promotion.

The total number of soul points you've contributed is displayed beside your 
name when viewing the deities of a pantheon.  Should you be outcast from the 
pantheon, all soul points you've contributed will be refunded.

For obvious reasons, this command is only available to those in pantheons.

See also: pantheon

=== ALIAS ===
  - alias list
  - alias add <new alias name> <expanded string>
  - alias show <alias name>
  - alias delete <alias name>

This command allows you to set aliases - customised commands, so to speak.  So
for example typing 'alias add forwards ff' would mean that whenever you typed 
'forwards', the mud would treat it as if you had typed 'ff' (feet forwards).

You may also include wildcards - %1, %2, %3, etc to represent single words, or
@1, @2, @3, etc to represent the word argument plus everything else up until 
the end of the line.  Thus if you typed 'alias add mutter say %1', the mutter 
alias would only say the first word you typed (so 'mutter hello there' would 
be the same as 'say hello'). But 'alias add mutter say @1' would cause the 
mutter alias to work exactly the same as say.

It is possible to have an alias with the same name as a command or social, in 
which case the alias will have priority.  So 'alias add grin grin %1 wickedly' 
(for example) would effectively give you a new default for the grin social.

Finally, you may also use the ':' character to separate multiple aliases - for 
example 'alias add walk stop:clear:target %1:ff'.

=== HOME ===
  - home
  - home <x> <y>

This command allows you to teleport back to your home plane from within the 
main world.  If you are already in your home plane, then it will move you 
back to the centre of the main world (i.e., the settlement).  Within your home
plane you may type 'repair' to repair your equipment, and 'restore self' to 
restore your health, mana and action points.  You may also 'slay' mobs, as 
well as 'invite' and 'banish' other players.  You also have a number of stores 
which you can summon from the ground, for keeping your spare equipment.

While on your home plane you may also 'fabricate' equipment from thin air.

You may view your home plane by typing 'area', and view your current tile by 
typing 'tile'.  You may also move an entire tile at a time by typing 'nn', 
'ss', 'ee' or 'ww' (optionally followed by the number of tiles you wish to 
move in that direction).

See also: terraform invite store tile zone creation fabricate

=== DEFENCE ===
Your character has three defence ratings - one for your left hand, one for your
right hand, and one for your feet - and these are calculated in the same seven 
steps as your Attack rating (see 'help attack').  Whenever you are struck in 
combat, the mud will use your best available location to try and prevent the 
blow from landing.

Each location takes a period of time (see 'help cooldown') to recover before 
it can be used for another defence.  While it is recovering, your second best 
defence will be used - and then your third best.  If all of your locations are 
still recovering then you will have a Defence of 1.

In your score your current best available defensive location is marked between
'>' and '<'.  No markers means you have no defence.  Each location is also 
colour coded to indicate whether it is able to stop all attacks, paired melee
attacks, normal melee attacks or unarmed attacks (with '-' indicating that no 
defence is available for that location).  If you have an ethereal defence, it 
will only be able to stop ethereal attacks.

Please note that any defensive technique bonuses from your feet combat table 
are applied to all locations, but are doubled for your feet location.  Your 
total encumbrance is also subtracted from your feet Defence.

See also: assist attack combat critical encumbrance kill cooldown

=== RESISTANCE ===
Resistance represents your character's physical toughness and ability to shrug 
off damage, and is calculated as follows:

1) Add together all the stat modifiers (Mettle, Size and Discipline).
2) Add bonuses from magical items, and most talents and powers.
3) Apply fighting style percentage modifier.
4) Add bonuses from talents/powers that specifically state 'after percentages'.
5) Add bonuses from spell affects.

When someone strikes you in combat, their Core Damage is calculated (in exactly
the same way as your Resistance), multiplied by 100, then divided by the sum of
their Core Damage and your Resistance, rounded up.  This is then applied as a 
percentage to their actual Damage rating (so if their Core Damage is exactly 
the same as your Resistance, their maximum damage will be half of their Damage,
as described in 'help damage').  This percentage will never fall below 25%.

Once the damage has been calculated, your armour will soak a percentage, then 
auto-absorb is applied, and then any remaining damage is subtracted from your 
health (see 'help health').

See also: assist attack combat damage defence

=== CLASSED ===
Once you've classed, it is recommended that you read 'help boost', and use 
either the casual or hardcore boosts to increase the amount of primal you earn.

In order to earn decent amounts of primal you should type 'shift' to transport 
yourself to the Nexus.  Be aware that there are no PK restrictions within the 
Nexus, and many players will be able to sense your arrival if you shift near 
them.  Thus it is recommended that you do not shift near Glyphstone Village.

You can use the 'area' command to locate terrain within the Nexus, and 'scan' 
to view task entry points.  Each new area you explore will earn you 100 primal,
and many of these areas will also unlock new tasks (type 'tasks' to list them).

As the primal you earn from kills is based on your age relative to that of your
opponent, the most efficient way to earn primal is to raise your potential to 
100% before you train any stats (because you'll be stronger for your age).  You
should spend primal as soon as possible, because although you lose primal for 
being killed, you cannot lose primal that you've already spent.

See also: area boost build death primal potential powers scan shift tasks

=== REPLENISHMENT ===
You automatically replenish 0.5 mana per second, plus any bonuses from powers, 
spells or equipment, with your green magic applied as a percentage bonus to 
the end result (capped at 100%). During an adrenaline rush you replenish only 
half of this amount.

Unlike healing, mana replenishment is not affected by being struck in combat.

See also: mana healing

=== BOOST ===
  - boost
  - boost casual/hardcore/skills

This command shows information about your boosts and auto-advance.  Typing 
'boost casual' costs 0.5 boost points and gives triple primal for your next 10
kills.  Typing 'boost hardcore' costs 0.25 boost points and gives double primal
for your next 10 kills.  Typing 'boost skills' costs 0.50 boost points and 
gives you 10 skill boosts (see 'help autoadvance' to see how they work).

You earn 2.5 boost points each day you log on, minus 0.01 for every non-boosted
kill you made the previous day (so 2.49 if you killed 1 mob the previous day, 
2.48 if you killed 2 mobs, 2.0 if you killed 50 mobs, etc).  If you don't log 
on for several days, you will not get any boosts for the days you missed.

Every kill beyond 250 that you earn on a particular day will be added to your 
Age for the purposes of calculating primal for kills, and will also be carried 
over to the next day (eg if you get 300 daily kills, you'll start the next day 
with 50).  Mobs which give 0 primal don't count towards this limit unless they 
are newbie training mobs (which count as 2 kills).  Some tasks reward you with 
kill buffer points - daily kills beyond 250 are absorbed by this buffer.

If you make a boosted kill, the chance of the item drop being rare or uncommon 
is triple, or double if it's a piece of craftable material.  See 'help items'.

=== SCALING ===
Many dragon powers use a system called 'scaling' for calculating their bonuses,
meaning that the first four ranks give a bigger bonus than the later points.

For example, the Fires of the Volcano power gives an immunity bonus of +5% for 
the first rank, +4% for the second rank, +3% for the third rank, +2% for the 
fourth rank and +1% for the fifth and later ranks.  This would be described as 
a +5/4/3/2/1 scaling bonus.

=== WEAR ===
  - wear <thing>
  - wear <thing> on <back/belt/leg/arm/chest>

This command allows you to wear the specified thing, if possible.  You must 
be carrying the thing in order to do this.

If the item you're wearing is a weapon, then you can also specify an exact 
location for it, such as on your belt or forearm.  If you don't specify a 
location in this way then the default for that weapon type will be used.  
Note also that only tiny weapons can be strapped to your chest or forearm, 
only small (or tiny) weapons can be strapped on your leg and only medium (or 
smaller) weapons can be strapped to your belt.

You cannot wear something while you have an adrenaline rush.

See also: wield remove get give drop swap draw sheathe

=== RADIATION ===
Magical items provide a source of power - but like all things magical, their 
power comes from the same primal energy that makes the Supernaturalis what they
are.  This results in an incompatibility, referred to as 'radiation', which
represents how much external magical power the Supernaturalis is able to bend 
to his or her will.

In game terms, each character may wear as much radiation as their Age times 10,
and it is not possible to exceed this maximum - attempting to wear further 
equipment is like trying to press together two opposing magnets.

=== PUT ===
  - put <object>
  - put <object> <creature>
  - put <object> on <creature>
  - put <creature> <object>
  - put on <creature> <object>

This command allows you to put an object on to the specified creature.
If you've already targeted the person you wish to put the object on, you 
can simply type 'put <object>'.

Note that '@' is an alias for 'on'.

See also: target

=== INNATE ===
Titans gain various innate bonuses based on their total power ranks, regardless
of the actual distribution of those ranks, as follows:

1) +1 Speed per rank (up to 2*max rank) and half that bonus to Speed Cap.
2) +2 Attack and Defence per rank (up to 5*max rank).
3) +1 Damage and Resistance per rank (up to 5*max rank).
4) +1% Health per two ranks (up to 4*max rank).
5) +1% immunity vs all damage types per rank (up to 1*max rank).  30% max.
6) +1 physical bypass per rank (up to 3*max rank).
7) +1 energy and mental bypass per three ranks (up to 3*max rank).
8) +2% natural armour vs all damage types per rank (up to 4*max rank).

Note that if you are wearing armour, half of its soak will be subtracted from 
the above natural armour bonus, although this cannot reduce it below 0%.

=== PSCORE ===
  - pscore <pet name>
  - pscore <pet name> skills
  - pscore <pet name> affects
  - pscore <pet name> armour
  - pscore <pet name> inventory
  - pscore <pet name> talents
  - pscore <pet name> powers
  - pscore <pet name> wounds

This command enables you to view the attributes and abilities of creatures 
you control (see 'help pets'), in much the same way as the 'score' command 
works for yourself.

See also: score pets

=== WHO ===
  - who
  - who brief/where/full/idle
  - whois <player>

The 'who' command will list which players are currently connected to the mud, 
with names colour-coded to indicate whether each player is in the outer Nexus,
the inner Nexus, a named Nexus area, a home plane (not necessarily their own) 
or somewhere else (such as the Realm, a dungeon, etc).  If you are classed, the
class names of other players in the Nexus will be colour-coded to indicate if 
they would or wouldn't give you primal, should you kill them.

Typing 'who brief' will list only the colour-coded player names, with a '*' 
indicating that the player is link-dead.

Typing 'who where' and 'who full' list where each player is located.

The 'whois' command allows you to view information about a specific player, 
such as when they last connected and how long they've played.  The 'finger' 
command is an alias for 'whois'.

=== MAP ===
  - map

This command toggles map mode on and off.  When map mode is on, you will see 
the map displayed when you type 'look'.

For information on decyphering ancient maps, type 'help maps'.

=== COOLDOWN ===
When your character successfully defends against an attack, it takes some time 
before that defence can be used again - this is called 'cooldown'.  For your 
feet (or unarmed attacks) this cooldown is between 4 and 7 seconds, depending 
on your encumbrance (4 for unencumbered, 5 for light, 6 for medium and 7 for 
heavy).  For a weapon it varies depending on the weapon type, but encumbrance 
is also a factor - you can find out the cooldown time for a weapon by looking 
at it.  Note that the weapon in your off-hand will also have +1 cooldown.

The cooldown timer won't go down while a combat technique is in its delay 
period and waiting to be performed (although it can still parry or block while 
being used to perform a technique - only the recovery time is delayed).

While wielding a weapon two handed, the assisting hand will automatically be 
used to help the cooldown timer for the other hand.  Thus the cooldown for a 
two-handed weapon will be half the normal time, or normal time while performing
techniques.

See also: defence

=== PROMOTE ===
  - promote <player>
  - demote <player>

These commands let you promote and demote other pantheon deities.  You cannot 
promote people to (or demote them from) your own rank or higher, and can only 
effect those you inducted unless you are a Major or Supreme God.  The ranks, 
with power bonuses and (total non-cumulative) promotion costs are as follows:

Supreme God : Gains a +3 power bonus.  The founder of the religion.
Major God   : Gains a +3 power bonus.  Costs 100000 soul points.
Greater God : Gains a +3 power bonus.  Costs 50000 soul points.
Lesser God  : Gains a +2 power bonus.  Costs 25000 soul points.
Minor God   : Gains a +2 power bonus.  Costs 10000 soul points.
Godling     : Gains a +1 power bonus.  Costs 5000 soul points.
Demigod     : Gains a +1 power bonus.  Costs 1000 soul points.
Immortal    : Gains a +0 power bonus.  Costs 0 soul points.

Note that the diety must have sacrificed enough soul points to cover their 
promotion cost, unless promoted by a Major or Supreme God.  The cost is paid 
by the pantheon, but is refunded if the player is later demoted or outcast.

In addition to the Supreme God, each pantheon may have a maximum of 15 deities 
at Minor God or higher, of which a maximum of 5 may be Greater God or higher.

See also: induct sacrifice

=== REMOVE ===
  - remove <thing>

This command allows you to remove the specified thing.  You must be wearing 
the specified thing in order to do this.

You cannot remove something while you have an adrenaline rush.

See also: wear wield get give drop swap

=== POWER ===
If you're looking for information on class powers, type 'help powers'.

Power represents the raw mental power of your character, and is calculated in 
five steps for each body location as follows:

1) Add together the stat modifiers.
2) Add any modifiers for the spell table.
3) Add any modifiers for magical items you're wearing.
4) Apply your style percentage, if any.
5) Add any modifiers for spell affects.

Your Power is used instead of Damage when you cast spells (both physical and 
mental).  The calculation is applied against Resistance in exactly the same 
way as Damage (see 'help damage'), using Core Power instead of Core Damage.

See also: magic damage ascendancy protection

=== POTENTIAL ===
Every imbued Supernaturalis has access to number of powers (see 'help powers').
The maximum number of ranks you may have divided among your powers is equal to 
your Age squared, divided by 1000, with your three highest ranked powers not 
counting towards the total.  The maximum rank you may have in any one power is 
equal to 10% of your Age.

This means that a newly classed character at Age 100 can have 3 powers at rank 
10, and an additional 10 ranks distributed as desired.  An Age 200 character 
can have 3 powers at rank 20, and an additional 40 distributed ranks.  An Age 
300 character can have 3 powers at rank 30, and an additional 90 distributed 
ranks.  And so on.

Your 'potential' (as listed in your score, assuming you're classed) represents 
what percentage of your maximum ranks you've trained.  Thus 100% potential for 
an Age 100 character means they have 3 powers at rank 10, and an additional 10 
ranks divided among their other powers.

=== WARBOARD ===
  - warboard

This command displays the warboard - a scoreboard listing the top 10 Great War
players of the week (see 'help great war').  It will also indicate if you 
have not yet fought a war today.

The warboard only counts your first Great War of the day.  If you quit before 
turn 1 begins, it won't count, but if you quit after turn 1 has begun you will
earn no points for that particular day.

Your score is based on your Glory, with your Kills used as a tie-breaker.

See also: war war2

=== CLOSE ===
  - open eyes/<object>
  - close eyes/<object>

These commands allow you to open and close your eyes, or a specified object 
that you are wearing.  You can see if an object can be opened and closed by 
looking at it (there will be a 'Special' field in the top section).

While your eyes are closed, you cannot see your opponent, and will suffer the 
usual -50% Defence penalty for visibility (see 'help blind fighting').  Certain
powers, such as Ears of the Bat, may give you additional benefits while your 
eyes are closed.  You will also be immune to attacks which require eye contact,
and have half your normal natural armour on your eyes (instead of none).

If you are wearing a helmet with a lowered visor, you suffer a -25% penalty to 
your Defence, applied after pain modifiers.  If you have Blind Fighting, this 
penalty is reduced to -10% (representing reduced hearing).  However the lowered
visor will protect the eyes, and also doubles the helmet's face protection.

See also: wear remove

=== CONFIG ===
  - config
  - config <option>

The config command allows you to customise certain aspects of the mud, such as 
the type of messages you get, which channels you can hear, whether your prompt 
is shown or not, and so on.  Typing 'config' on its own will list the options 
available, while 'config <option>' will toggle that particular setting on and 
off.  The config options are colour-coded to indicate if they have changed, or 
are set to their default (starting) value.

=== ASSIST ===
Some weapons are designed to be used two-handed, others one-handed, and a rare
few are equally viable either way.  To use a weapon two-handed you must assist
with the other hand (type 'ra' for right assist or 'la' for left assist).  

In most cases an assisting hand has no techniques of its own other than 'r' to 
release that hand from its two-handed grip.  Equally, an assisting hand cannot 
be used to defend against attacks.  However there are benefits to be had from 
using a weapon in this way - typing 'l?' or 'r?' for the assisting hand will 
display the bonuses it grants (+100% divided among Attack, Defence and Damage 
if the weapon is designed to be used two-handed in melee, +10% to each if not).
In addition, using a weapon in this way will generally unlock more techniques, 
or upgrade the bonuses of existing ones - such techniques will be displayed in 
cyan in the combat table.  Furthermore, your defence cooldown time (see 'help 
cooldown') will be halved, or work at normal speed if you normally couldn't 
recover at all (for example, while performing a combat technique).

The exception to the above is bows.  A bow can only be used as a basic club 
when wielded one-handed, but when used two-handed the assisting hand gains 
access to a selection of ranged attacks.  The other hand may continue to make 
bashing attacks with the bow itself, but this will interfere with any attacks 
being made with the assisting hand.  Like other weapons, a bow can be released 
from two-handed use via the 'r' command.  See also 'help archery'.

=== CAP ===
Your bonuses from skills and styles are capped at 100, meaning that only the 
first 100 points are used to determine bonuses, with the following exceptions:

Your current fighting style is applied as an uncapped percentage bonus to the 
attack, defence and damage of all your combat techniques.  For example if your 
strike normally has +20 attack and +10 damage, but you have 400 in your current 
style, the technique will actually have a +400% (i.e. 5 times) bonus giving it 
+100 attack and +50 damage (you can see this full bonus on your combat table).

Spells work as above, except they use their appropriate magic colour instead of
your style, with the bonus being applied to their range, ascendancy and power.

Your weapon skills are applied as an uncapped percentage bonus to the attack, 
defence and damage of your weapons, as per 'help weapon'.

Points of Athletics over 100 are applied as a flat bonus, as per 'help health'.

Note that if you are using an advanced or super style, the cap will still apply
to the first 100 points, distributed as a 50%/50% or 34%/33%/33% bonus.

=== GET ===
  - get <thing>
  - get all

This command allows you to pick something up off the ground, as long as you are
standing right beside it.  If you are some distance away, you will need to 
'target' it and walk up to it first.

See also: wear wield remove give drop swap fabricate

=== SCAN ===
  - scan

This command shows you information about the surrounding terrain, a bit like 
typing 'look' on its own except that the map uses the same scale as the 'area' 
command.  Unlike the area command, however, scan will also show you subareas 
as well as task locations.

See also: area look

=== COUNTER-ATTACK ===
Many weapons have some sort of counter-attack, usually in the form of a 'ddd' 
technique (eg 'rd', 'rd', 'rd' to perform right handed).  These counter-attacks
operate exactly like defensive techniques, except that when you successfully 
defend they follow up with an attack.

This follow-up attack is usually automatic, except for swordbreakers and tiger 
claws, which give you 5 seconds to choose a response - allowing you to disarm 
your opponent, break their weapon, or perform an attack.  A main gauche also 
has the ability to lock the weapons it parries, which freezes the main gauche 
and the attacking weapon for 5 seconds (very useful vs two-handed weapons).

A counter-attack can only be dodged, or blocked by shields.  After execution 
it will need to be reset, although it still provides a regular defence.

It's important to remember that the counter-attack waits until triggered by a 
successful block or parry, so after setting it up you shouldn't perform any 
other commands with that location or you'll lose the counter-attack.

See also: combo interleaving techniques tutorial

=== PANTHEONS ===
  - pantheons

This command displays the pantheon scoreboard - a scoreboard listing the top 10
pantheons of the week, sorted in order of Karma.

If you've earned less Karma in the current week than you did the previous week,
the Karma in the scoreboard will be the average of the two weeks.  Otherwise it
will be the Karma you've earned the current week.  Thus you will usually begin 
the week with a certain amount of Karma on the scoreboard.

Your pantheon power gains a +2 bonus if your pantheon ended the previous week 
on rank 1-5, or a +1 bonus if it ended on rank 6-10.

See also: pantheon karma

=== CRITICAL ===
Your percentage chance to hit someone is your attack times 100, divided by the 
total of your attack plus your opponent's defence.  For example, if you have 
the same attack as your opponent has defence, you will have a 50% chance of 
hitting them.  If your attack is double your opponent's defence, you will have 
a 66% chance of hitting them.  If your attack is three times your opponent's 
defence, you will have a 75% chance of hitting them.  And so on.

The mud then makes your attack roll by generating a random number between 1 and
100.  If you are using Expert Axeman and roll below 96, the result is reduced 
by 5.  If the roll is 5 or less, your attack is a critical hit.  If the roll is
greater than your chance of hitting, or greater than 95, then the attack fails.

If your attack is successful, it may still be a critical hit.  Calculate your 
accuracy bonus by subtracting 50 from your chance of hitting, to a minimum of 
1.  The percentage success of your attack is equal to your chance of hitting, 
minus your attack roll, plus your accuracy bonus, multiplied by 100 and then 
divided by your chance of hitting.  This percentage success will always be at 
least 1% and never more than 100%.  If it is 100% then you inflict a critical 
hit.  This percentage also indicates how much of your damage you inflict - if 
you hit with a 50% success, you cause half of your maximum damage.

=== INTERLEAVING ===
When queuing up multiple combat techniques, you should use an approach called 
interleaving.  For example if you want to perform three strikes with each hand,
rather than typing 'ls', 'ls', 'ls', 'rs', 'rs', 'rs', you should instead type 
'ls', 'rs', 'ls', 'rs', 'ls', 'rs', so that the techniques alternate between 
your left and right hand.

The reason for this is that commands come off the queue in the order that they
were added.  If you enter all of the left strikes first, then no right strikes
will come off the queue until all of the left ones have first been used.  While
this might initially seem counterintuitive, it does ensure that all your queued
commands will be performed.

If you type 'config interleaving', each location will instead pull techniques 
off the queue as soon as possible.  However you should be aware that this may 
result in situations where high-AP techs never came off the queue, because the 
cheaper techs are performed the moment you have sufficient AP.

=== HINT ===
  - hint

This command toggles hint mode on and off.  When hint mode is on, you will be 
given hints based on what you are currently doing.  This is very useful for 
new players, but may be switched off by more confident players.

=== BUILD ===
Each class can be played in a wide variety of different ways, and your 'build' 
refers to your current combination of stats, powers and talents.  You will most
likely try lots of different builds before settling on one you like.

If you don't know where to start, select one of the following:

1) Blood Legacy and Blood Potency.
2) Rage of the Beast, Extended Rage and Berserker Rage.
3) Mind Magic, Serenity, Mind Over Matter, Martial Gnosis and a Style Mastery.

Then focus on one of the following power/talent combinations:

1) Bat Form, House NightWing, Venom and Evasion.
2) Wolf Form, Claws of the Wolf, Lupine Fortitude, Sure Footed and Evasion.
3) Mist Form, Shadow Crafting, Path of Shadows and House ShadowSworn.
4) Blood Runes, Blood Forging, Armour Proficiency and Heavy Armour Expert.
5) Shadow Crafting, Blade of Darkness, Assassin Training and House DarkBlade.

=== EVENTS ===
  - events

This command displays the list of currently available events.  There can be up 
to ten events running at any one time, and shortly after one is completed a 
new one will begin.

Event mobs give twice as much primal as regular mobs of the same age, and this 
bonus DOES stack with boost (i.e., killing an event mob with casual boost gives
you six times the normal amount of primal).

The chance of an event mob dropping a rare or uncommon item is tripled, or 
doubled if they drop craftable material.  This is the same improved drop bonus 
that is granted by boost, which means that the two do NOT stack.

=== NEWBIE ===
This is a basic introduction for new players.  Make sure you read the hints as 
well!  For a more detailed newbie guide, see: http://www.godwars2.org/guide.php

Type 'target practice grounds' then 'ff' (feet forwards).  When you arrive type
'enter practice grounds' and 'target dummy'.  Read 'help tutorial' to learn how
combat works, practicing your different fighting moves on the training dummy.

Once you've worked out the basics, type 'leave' to exit the practice grounds, 
then 'target prison' and 'ff' (feet forwards).  When you reach the prison, type
'enter prison', 'target prisoner', then use what you've learned; kill him.

When you're comfortable fighting someone who hits back, type 'leave' to get out
of the prison, then 'target dojo' and 'ff'.  When you arrive, type 'enter dojo'
and then type 'challenge' to fight a white-sash martial artist.  After killing 
him, wear the sash and 'challenge' again to fight a stronger martial artist.

Once you've earned your black sash, use the 'area' command to locate monster 
lairs (see 'help tasks').  You can also return to your home plane to change 
your character setup, or to fabricate some equipment.  Read 'help classes' 
for a summary of each class, and 'help classing' to learn how to join one.

See also: classing combat movement kill setup skills style talents

=== WEATHER ===
  - weather

This command, when typed outdoors, will display the surrounding weather 
patterns.  Each character represents 660x660 feet (one square furlong, or a 
single tile), and the 'X' in the centre represents your current tile.  The 
'@' represents a thunderstorm, 'O' represents rain, 'o' represents heavy 
clouds and '.' represents light clouds, while everything else is clear sky.

=== MOVEMENT ===
  - n/s/e/w/u/d
  - n/s/e/w/u/d <distance>
  - n/s/e/w/u/d <distance> yards/chains/furlongs/miles/leagues/tiles

These commands allow you to move around, by setting your destination to the 
specified offset of your currently selected destination (which by default is 
your current location).  If you don't specify a distance, then you will move a 
default distance based on the scale of the area you are in.

For example, if you are standing at coordinate position 0/0 and type 'n 20', 
your destination will be set to 20/0 and you will immediately start moving 
(unless you are intentionally standing still) towards that location.  Should 
you then type 'e 10', the destination will become '20/10' and you will start 
moving east as well as north.

This command will override any current 'target' (and vice versa).  Select your 
movement speed by typing 'ff' (feet forwards) and 'fb' (feet backwards).

Note that you may also use 'ne', 'nw', 'se' and 'sw' to move diagonally.  These
commands are the same as typing both directions separately - so 'ne 100' would 
set your destination to 100 north and 100 east (i.e., 141 feet north-east).

See also: clear rate target

=== BYPASS ===
  - bypass

When you strike someone in combat, your attack has to go through their armour 
before it can inflict damage.  Your bypass helps you to do this.

Certain talents, such as Cleave, Smash and Pierce, provide a bypass bonus to
specific damage types.  Some weapons also have this as an innate ability for 
certain commands, which are coloured cyan (along with their AP cost) at the top
of the combat table.  It's also possible to receive bypass bonuses from certain
powers or magical item bonuses - and these will all be added together.

Whenever you strike an opponent, every point of bypass will negate one point of
your opponent's armour.  If you completely negate their first layer of armour, 
you'll then move on to the second layer, then the third, and so on, until you 
run out of bypass or they run out of armour.  For example, if you had 50 bypass
and your opponent was wearing a 40% armour helm and a 50% armour coif, the helm
would end up soaking 0% damage while the coif would soak 40% damage.

Bypass has no effect on immunities, and only effects auto-absorb on a critical
hit.  This is described further in 'help armour' and 'help armour2'.  You also 
gain a bonus when you inflict a critical hit - see 'help critical-bypass'.

=== DIPLOMACY ===
  - assassinate <opponent>
  - spy <opponent>

These are Diplomacy war commands (see 'help war'), usable only while you are on
your home plane, and each costs one action to perform.

The assassinate command requires 5 Offence, and at least 2 must be Diplomacy.  
If your attack wins, then each point you beat your opponent's Defence by will 
be converted into a point of damage, and your opponent won't know who performed
the attack.  On a draw, neither side takes any damage, and the defender only 
knows that someone tried to attack them.  If you lose, you take one damage, and
the defender knows that you sent the assassin.

The spy command requires 3 Diplomacy Offence.  If your Offence rating exceeds 
your opponent's Defence, then this command will reveal the details of their 
current Offence, Defence and Resources.  It will not reveal additional defences
or fortifications, nor will it indicate how many actions they have remaining.

=== MILITARY ===
  - attack <opponent>

These are Military war commands (see 'help war'), usable only while you are on
your home plane, and each costs one action to perform.

The attack command requires 5 Offence, and at least 1 must be Military.  If you
beat your opponent's Defence, each point you win by will be converted into a
point of damage.  On a draw, both you and your opponent will take a point of
damage.  If you lose, you take a point of damage.

=== DRAW ===
  - draw <weapon>
  - draw <weapons>
  - draw all
  - draw *

This command allows you to draw the specified weapon from its sheathed 
location, placing it into your first available hand.  You may also choose 
to draw multiple weapons at the same time by providing the plural form of 
that weapon (eg 'draw knives' rather than 'draw knife') - if the weapon's 
singular and plural form are the same (eg a kris) then the mud will attempt 
to draw both.  You may also type 'draw all' to draw the first two sheathed 
weapons you're wearing, or 'draw *' to draw the first available weapon.

This command also allows you to unstrap a target shield from your back, or 
grip a buckler which was previously hanging loose on your arm.  While this 
is not really 'drawing' as such, it uses the same command for the sake of 
simplicity.

See also: sheathe

=== FACTION ===
  - faction
  - faction human
  - faction goblinoid
  - faction undead
  - faction nature

This command allows you to view and change your war faction, although you 
cannot change while already participating in a war.

The four suits have different commands and options for each faction, so you 
should be sure to read the military, religion, economy and diplomacy help 
files whenever you change to a new faction.

In addition, each faction has its own set of recruits.

See also: war military religion economy diplomacy recruit

=== MCCP ===
The Mud Client Compression Protocol (MCCP) is a protocol for compressing data 
sent from the mud.  God Wars II only supports MCCP2, as MCCP1 is obsolete.

MCCP2 is supported by MUSHCLIENT, and has been automatically enabled.  

Read more about it here: http://mccp.smaugmuds.org/protocol.html

=== CLASS ===
A newly created Supernaturalis is often referred to as an 'unimbued' - an empty
avatar which hasn't yet found its calling.

To become imbued you need to have at least five talents, wear a black sash 
that you've earned from the dojo, and be holding two classing tokens for the 
class you wish to join.  Type 'class <class name>' to join a class - but once 
you've chosen you can never go back, so think carefully before deciding.  Upon
becoming imbued you will gain 50 bonus stat points, distributed according to 
your class.  You will also gain access to a range of class powers, and be able
to train your stats.  Each time you train a stat, the mud will also boost 
another stat, randomly selected based on your class.

Each class belongs to one of four callings: Revenant are those who draw their 
power from a state of undeath, Lycanthropes gain power through animal spirits, 
Illuminati study ancient lore and master their inner potential, and Nephilim 
gain power by possessing or merging with non-human entities.

See also: vampire werewolf mage demon dragon titan classes classing

=== CLEARAFFECTS ===
  - clearaffects

This command strips all spell and power affects from you (i.e., all affects 
displayed by the 'affects' command).

Note that you only have access to this command while on your home plane.

See also: affects

=== MAPS ===
To decypher a map you must first wield it, and assist with the other hand (see
'help assist').  Each hand then has access to a selection of techniques, each 
of which increases or decreases two or more of the five cyphers on the map.

You should use your techniques to adjust the cyphers so that they are all set
as correct.  If your technique would raise or lower a cypher too far, you will
be told that you're confused, which means that the technique failed to work.

Once you've finished decyphering the map, you can examine it to get directions
to a magical node in the Nexus.  Examine the map again at the node, defeat the
guardian spirit, and your boost points (NOT active boosts) will be converted
into primal at the rate of 50 primal per 0.01 boost points (although it won't
convert more than the number you need to train a single stat).

Your first completed map each day gives you an alternative benefit (except for 
energy maps, which always work as described above): An age map costs 1.0 boost 
points and gives you a free stat train, a power map costs 0.5 boost points and 
gives you a free power train, and a renewal map costs 5.0 boost points and 
resets your monthly 'train reroll' option (see 'help reroll').

Upon reaching age 300, age maps will function as energy maps.  Equally, after 
reaching 180 total power ranks, power maps will also function as energy maps.

=== CRITICAL-BYPASS ===
When you inflict a critical hit, your bypass will be increased to reflect your 
blow striking a particularly vulnerable location.  You have a critical bypass 
of 150% by default - for example, if your bypass is normally +10, your critical
hit will actually have a total of +15 bypass (i.e., 150% of +10).

Some weapons have a critical bypass bonus for one of their commands, coloured 
cyan (along with the AP cost) at the top of the combat table.  Weapons with a 
critical bypass bonus will state how much bonus they give (+10% or +25%) within
their description.  This is added directly to the 150% base critical bypass, so
for example a rapier gives +25% critical bypass to all stab attacks, meaning 
that your critical stab attacks will have 175% of your regular bypass bonus.

Each combat technique may also provide an additional critical bypass bonus, 
depending on the colour-coding of its damage bonus: +20%, +10%, +5% or +0%.

Finally, certain Expert talents may also provide a critical bypass bonus (this 
will be described in the help file for each talent, if appropriate).  All of 
these bonuses are added together before being applied to your base bypass.

=== FABRICATE ===
  - fabricate
  - fabricate <item>

This allows you to fabricate items out of thin air.

Note that this command is only available when you are on your home plane.

See also: home

=== DRAGON ===
Dragons are an ancient and powerful race of Nephilim, and come in many shapes 
and forms.  They gain the following stat bonuses:

=== PASSWORD ===
  - password <old> <new>

This command allows you to change your password.  Note that while passwords 
are encrypted, we strongly recommend that you make them unique.

=== RECRUIT ===
During a Planar War or Great War, you have the option to recruit specialised 
individuals using recruit points.  You begin with 1 recruit point, and earn an
extra point every time you kill an opponent.

To view the available recruits along with their bonuses, type 'recruits' - 
the letter after the name represents the cost to purchase the recruit (eg 'M' 
costs 1 Military resource).  Some bonuses include both a Basic and an Expert 
bonus; you only get the Expert bonus if you already had the Basic bonus (eg 
Treasurer gives you the invest command, but if you already had that command 
you instead get +1 action per turn).

Type 'recruit <name>' to recruit the specified individual.  The recruit will 
remain in your service for the duration of the war, but vanishes along with 
any unused recruit points after the war has finished.

Note the 'treaty' command (granted by the Ambassadors recruit) can only be used
if your Offence and Defence each have 5 resources, and the former has a higher 
bonus than the latter.  Your Offence and Defence hands will be swapped, and you
will be unable to attack until next turn.  The person you target will also have
their own Offence and Defence hands swapped, and be unable to attack this turn.

=== EQUIPMENT ===
  - equipment
  - equipment <keyword>
  - equipment sheathed
  - equipment slots
  - equipment radiation

This command shows whatever you are currently wearing (but not carrying).  You 
may also specify a keyword, which will result in only the matching items being
listed.  Alternatively, you may specify the keyword 'sheathed', which will list
all sheathed items you are wearing.

Typing 'equipment slots' will list what equipment your current form can wear.

Typing 'equipment radiation' will list the radiation of each worn item.

See also: inventory tack

=== ENTER ===
  - enter <thing>

This command allows you to enter the specified thing, usually a place (such as 
a town), but it will also work on containers if they are large enough, or even 
(potentially) other creatures.

See also: leave

=== IGNORE ===
  - ignore
  - ignore <player>

This command allows you to ignore the specified player, meaning that you will 
no longer see anything they chat, and they will be unable to send you tells or 
replies, or invite you to their home plane.  Equally, you will be unable to 
send them tells.

If you're already ignoring the specified person, this command will remove them 
from your ignore list.

Typing 'ignore' on its own will show who you are currently ignoring.  Please 
note that you may only ignore up to twenty-five people at a time, and the 
ignore list does not save.

Adding a '*' after the person's name ignores all of their known alts as well.

To ignore everyone, use 'config chat' and 'config tell'.

See also: tell reply chat config

=== ARMOUR ===
  - armour
  - armour <worn/total/spell/natural/immunity/bypass>
  - armour <cut/stab/etc> <face/body/etc> <damage> (<bypass>)

This command lists the total percentage damage soaked by a blow after it has 
passed through all of your layers of armour (including natural and immunity), 
for each body location, vs each type of damage.  The second value (after the %)
is the auto-absorb - eg '50%/5' means 50% soak and 5 points of auto-absorb.

Each layer of armour you wear soaks a percentage of the damage that strikes it.
For example, if wearing a breastplate and a chainmail shirt, and both soaked 
50% damage, when struck by 100 points of damage the breastplate would soak the 
first 50 and the chainmail shirt the next 25 (i.e., 50% of the 50 damage that 
got past the breastplate).  No single layer of armour can soak more than 75% 
damage, and will be capped at 75% after applying bypass (see 'help bypass').

After worn armour comes your spell armour, then your natural armour, each of 
which are treated exactly like a layer of worn armour.

To read the rest of this help file, type 'help armour2'.

=== LEAVE ===
  - leave

This command allows you to leave whatever you are currently inside of, if such
a possibility is available (for example it is not generally that easy to leave
a monster that has just eaten you).  For example typing 'leave' right now would
result in you attempting to leave Player's home plane.

See also: enter

=== ASCENDANCY ===
Your Ascendancy rating for each location is calculated as follows:

1) Add together the stat modifiers.
2) Add any modifiers for the spell table.
3) Add any modifiers for magical items you're wearing.
4) Add Meditate and the spell colour, then apply them as a percentage.
5) Apply your style percentage, if any.
6) Add any modifiers for spell affects.
7) Apply any pain modifiers as a percentage.

Your Ascendancy is used instead of Attack when you cast spells, but your chance
to hit is worked out in exactly the same way (see 'help attack').  The only 
exception is for indirect spells, which use your opponent's Protection instead 
of Defence when determining whether or not your spell is successful.

See also: magic attack protection power penalties speed

=== DISMOUNT ===
  - dismount

This command allows your character to dismount.

See also: mount tack

=== . ===

=== ATTACK ===
Your Attack rating for each location is calculated as follows:

1) Add together the stat modifiers and subtract any weapon penalties.
2) Add any modifiers for the weapon table and bonuses for the weapon itself.
3) Add any modifiers for magical items you're wearing.
4) Add Combat to your appropriate weapon skill, then apply as a percentage.
5) Apply your two-handed percentages modifier, if any.
6) Apply your style percentage, if any.
7) Add any modifiers for spell affects.
8) Apply any pain modifiers as a percentage.

Your percentage chance to hit is calculated by multiplying your Attack rating 
by 100, then dividing it by your Attack plus your opponent's Defence.  Note 
that there is always at least a 5% chance to hit, and a 5% chance to miss.

In your score, your attack for each location is colour-coded to indicate its 
current attack strength, representing what defence strength is needed to 
counter it - a shield or dodges, paired weapons, normal weapons or any (non-
attacks are indicated by a '-').  In addition, ethereal attacks can only be
stopped by a shield or dodges, or by an ethereal defence.

See also: assist combat critical damage defence kill penalties speed
