---
layout: help
title: diplomacy
---

These are Diplomacy war commands (see 'help war'), usable only while you are on
your home plane, and each costs one action to perform.

### Human
- Syntax: `assassinate <opponent>`
- Syntax: `agents`
- Syntax: `gather`
- Syntax: `spy <opponent>`

The assassinate command requires 5 Offence, and at least 2 must be Diplomacy.  
If your attack wins, then each point you beat your opponent's Defence by will 
be converted into a point of damage, and your opponent won't know who performed
the attack.  On a draw, neither side takes any damage, and the defender only 
knows that someone tried to attack them.  If you lose, you take one damage, and
the defender knows that you sent the assassin.

The agents command requires at least 2 Diplomacy Defence.  It increases your 
Defence rating by 1 against Diplomacy attacks and grants you Initiative (see 
'help initiative') for the rest of the turn.

The gather command costs 1 Diplomacy Resource, and prevents you attacking the 
same turn.  It increases your Diplomacy Offence by 1 and grants you Initiative 
(see 'help initiative') for the next turn only.

The spy command requires 3 Diplomacy Offence.  If your Offence rating exceeds 
your opponent's Defence, then this command will reveal the details of their 
current Offence, Defence and Resources.  It will not reveal additional defences
or fortifications, nor will it indicate how many actions they have remaining.

### Goblin
- Syntax: `ambush`

The ambush command requires 5 Offence, and at least 1 must be Diplomacy.  You 
cannot perform an attack, raid or jihad in the same turn as an ambush.  If you 
are attacked in a turn when you've set an ambush, and your Offence is higher 
than your Defence, you will defend using your Offence.  If your Defence equals 
or exceeds your Offence, you instead get a +1 Defence bonus for the turn.  In 
either case, any damage you suffer will always be taken from your Defence hand.
This bonus doesn't apply against Diplomacy attacks (assassinate and haunt).

### Undead
- Syntax: `haunt <opponent>`

The haunt command requires 5 Offence, and at least 3 must be Diplomacy.  It is 
treated as an attack against your opponent's Religion Offence (rather than 
Defence), and if you win their Offence takes one point of damage.  If you lose 
or draw, neither side takes any damage.  Your opponent won't know that it was 
you who performed this attack, regardless of the outcome.

### Nature
- Syntax: `assassinate <opponent>`
- Syntax: `spy <opponent>`

The assassinate command requires 5 Offence, and at least 2 must be Diplomacy.  
If your attack wins, then each point you beat your opponent's Defence by will 
be converted into a point of damage, and your opponent won't know who performed
the attack.  On a draw, neither side takes any damage, and the defender only 
knows that someone tried to attack them.  If you lose, you take one damage, and
the defender knows that you sent the assassin.

The spy command requires 3 Diplomacy Offence.  If your Offence rating exceeds 
your opponent's Defence, then this command will reveal the details of their 
current Offence, Defence and Resources.  It will not reveal additional defences
or fortifications, nor will it indicate how many actions they have remaining.
