---
layout: help
title: economy
---

These are Economy war commands (see 'help war'), usable only while you are on 
your home plane, and the first three each cost one action to perform.

### Human
- Syntax: `mercenary <opponent>`
- Syntax: `bribery`
- Syntax: `hire`
- Syntax: `invest`

The mercenary command requires 5 Offence, and at least 2 must be Economy.  If 
your attack is 3 or more higher than your opponent's Defence, you will inflict
3 damage.  If you draw or win by 1 or 2, you inflict 2 damage.  If you lose by 
1 or 2, you inflict 1 damage.  You inflict no damage if you lose by 3 or more.
Note that you will automatically take 1 damage, regardless of how successful 
your attack is.  Mercenaries will never completely destroy a city.

The bribery command requires at least 2 Economy Defence.  It increases your 
Defence rating by 1 against Economy attacks and grants you Initiative (see 
'help initiative') for the rest of the turn.

The hire command costs 1 Economy Resource, and prevents you attacking the same
turn.  It increases your Economy Offence by 1 and grants you Initiative (see 
'help initiative') for the next turn only.

The invest command requires 3 Economy Defence.  Performing this command will 
cause you to invest all of your remaining actions for use in a later turn.  If 
you type this command while you have 0 remaining actions, you will retrieve 
your previously invested actions.  Note that you can only have one investment 
at a time (i.e., you cannot invest if you have actions AND stored actions).

### Goblin
- Syntax: `raid <opponent>`

The raid command requires 2 Offence, and at least 1 must be Economy.  If you 
beat your opponent's Defence by 3 or more, you inflict 2 damage and earn +1 
action on your next turn.  If you win by 1 or more, you inflict 1 damage.  If 
you lose, you take 1 damage.  You may raid even on the first turn, but raiding
alone will never destroy a city.

### Undead
The undead have no Economy war commands (see 'help war').  Instead, they use 
Economy Resources to recruit evil sorcerers and powerful undead champions.

The undead place little value in coins of gold and silver.  Instead, their 
economy is based on corpses and souls - the raw materials with which they 
build and feed their fearsome armies.

### Nature
- Syntax: `mercenary <opponent>`

The mercenary command requires 5 Offence, and at least 2 must be Economy.  If 
your attack is 3 or more higher than your opponent's Defence, you will inflict
3 damage.  If you draw or win by 1 or 2, you inflict 2 damage.  If you lose by 
1 or 2, you inflict 1 damage.  You inflict no damage if you lose by 3 or more.
Note that you will automatically take 1 damage, regardless of how successful 
your attack is.  Mercenaries will never completely destroy a city.
