---
layout: help
title: military
---

These are Military war commands (see 'help war'), usable only while you are on
your home plane, and each costs one action to perform.

### Human
- Syntax: `attack <opponent>`
- Syntax: `patrol`
- Syntax: `drill`
- Syntax: `fortify`


The attack command requires 5 Offence, and at least 2 must be Military.  If you
beat your opponent's Defence, each point you win by will be converted into a 
point of damage.  On a draw, both you and your opponent will take a point of 
damage (but this cannot kill).  If you lose, you take a point of damage.

The patrol command requires at least 2 Military Defence.  It increases your 
Defence rating by 1 against Military attacks and grants you Initiative (see 
'help initiative') for the rest of the turn.

The drill command costs 1 Military Resource, and prevents you attacking the 
same turn.  It increases your Military Offence by 1 and grants you Initiative 
(see 'help initiative') for the next turn only.

The fortify command requires 5 Defence, and at least 3 must be Military.  If 
your Defence is wiped out, your fortifications will be used to absorb further 
damage (although they are only removed after Defence has been wiped out).

### Goblin
- Syntax: `attack <opponent>`
- Syntax: `tribe`

The attack command requires 5 Offence, and at least 1 must be Military.  If you
beat your opponent's Defence, each point you win by will be converted into a
point of damage.  On a draw, both you and your opponent will take a point of
damage (but this cannot kill).  If you lose, you take a point of damage.

The tribe command requires you to have at least one of the three orc recruits 
(see 'help recruit'), and represents you calling one or more of the orc tribes 
to your banner.  For the rest of the turn you gain +1 Military Defence per orc 
recruit, but are unable to attack, raid, jihad or ambush.  The next turn you 
instead gain +1 Military Offence per orc recruit.  You cannot reactivate the 
tribe command if it is already giving you a bonus to either Offence or Defence.

### Undead
- Syntax: `attack <opponent>`

The attack command requires 5 Offence, which can be of any suit.  If you beat 
your opponent's Defence, each point you win by will be converted into a point 
of damage.  On a draw, both you and your opponent will take a point of damage 
(although this cannot kill).  If you lose, you take a point of damage.

### Nature
- Syntax: `attack <opponent>`

The attack command requires 5 Offence, and at least 1 must be Military.  If you
beat your opponent's Defence, each point you win by will be converted into a
point of damage.  On a draw, both you and your opponent will take a point of
damage.  If you lose, you take a point of damage.
