---
layout: help
title: religion
---

These are Religion war commands (see 'help war'), usable only while you are on 
your home plane, and each costs one action to perform.

### Human
- Syntax: `jihad <opponent>`
- Syntax: `prayer`
- Syntax: `preach`
- Syntax: `crusade`

The jihad command requires 5 Offence, and at least 2 must be Religion.  This 
attack automatically gets a bonus of +1 Offence.  If it wins, then each point 
you beat your opponent's Defence by will be converted into a point of damage, 
and you do an additional +1 damage afterwards.  If you inflict more than 3 
points of damage, you'll take a point of damage, otherwise you'll take 2 points
of damage.  Your opponent takes 2 damage on a draw, and 1 damage if they beat 
you, but in both cases you will also take 5 damage.

The prayer command requires at least 2 Religion Defence.  It increases your 
Defence rating by 1 against Religion attacks and grants you Initiative (see 
'help initiative') for the rest of the turn.

The preach command costs 1 Religion Resource, and prevents you attacking the 
same turn.  It increases your Religion Offence by 1 and grants you Initiative 
(see 'help initiative') for the next turn only.

The crusade command requires 5 Defence, and at least 3 must be Religion.  It 
will swap your Offence and Defence, and increases your Religion Offence by +1 
for the same turn (as if you had preached the previous turn).

### Goblin
- Syntax: `jihad <opponent>`

The jihad command requires 5 Offence, and at least 1 must be Religion.  This 
attack automatically gets a bonus of +1 Offence.  If it wins, then each point 
you beat your opponent's Defence by will be converted into a point of damage, 
and you do an additional +1 damage afterwards.  If you inflict more than 3 
points of damage, you'll take a point of damage, otherwise you'll take 2 points
of damage.  Your opponent takes 2 damage on a draw, and 1 damage if they beat 
you, but in both cases you will also take 5 damage.

### Undead
- Syntax: `zombies <opponent>`

The zombie command requires 5 Offence, and at least 3 must be Religion.  This 
attack automatically gets a bonus of +1 Offence.  If it wins, then each point 
you beat your opponent's Defence by will be converted into a point of damage, 
and you do an additional +1 damage afterwards.  If you inflict more than 3 
points of damage, you'll take a point of damage, otherwise you'll take 2 points
of damage.  Your opponent takes 2 damage on a draw, and 1 damage if they beat 
you, but in both cases you will also take 5 damage.

### Nature
- Syntax: `jihad <opponent>`

The jihad command requires 5 Offence, and at least 2 must be Religion.  This 
attack automatically gets a bonus of +1 Offence.  If it wins, then each point 
you beat your opponent's Defence by will be converted into a point of damage, 
and you do an additional +1 damage afterwards.  If you inflict more than 3 
points of damage, you'll take a point of damage, otherwise you'll take 2 points
of damage.  Your opponent takes 2 damage on a draw, and 1 damage if they beat 
you, but in both cases you will also take 5 damage.
